It is a homogeneous set of four pieces from the Wurts collection, dating back to the sixteenth century and made of carved, polychromed and gilded pine. There are four figures, their size is smaller than the natural (just over 1 meter) set on a small sphere, made in a single sculpted block full inside. The figures represent famous infantry soldiers from the regions of the Holy Roman Empire (Swabia, Bavaria, Vorarlberg, Tyrol) who fought between the end of the 15th century and the end of the 17th one. The Landsknecht took part in the Sack of Rome on May 6, 1527. German mercenary soldiers were enlisted in the army of Emperor Charles V of Hapsburg.
The tragic event, characterized by the brutality and uncontrolled violence of the Landsknechts, marked an important moment in the long wars for the dominance in Europe between the Holy Roman Empire and the Kingdom of France, allied with the Papal State led by Pope Clement VII. The devastation and occupation of the city of Rome seemed to confirm symbolically the decline of Italy at the mercy of foreign armies and the humiliation of the Catholic Church committed to countering also the movement of the Lutheran Reformation developed in Germany. The sculptor has grasped each of them in a different attitude: one is simply standing, another sings, the third drinks and the last toasts. The whole is a cheerful and animated picture that seems to display a popular German song. The clothing is a bit messy and characterized by wide and wavy forms: short and colorful jackets with cuts from which comes out the wide shirt, woolen trousers, short breeches, braghetta, large hat with rich plumage. We can also notice the presence of armor (halberd, light sword and katzbalger). It is difficult to hypothesize the environmental context and the original function of these pieces; whether they were part of a decorative system or used in isolation, in different points of the environment. Certainly they were designed for a 360 ° vision, as evidenced by the fact of being sculpted all round and finely painted even in the back.
