These two paintings were realized in the same period, from the same author and for the same purpose.  The author is Giuseppe Maria Crespi also known as the Spanish or Spagnoletto for his habit to dress suits fitted tightly to Spanish fashion. 
Both paintings were directly commissioned by Cardinal Tommaso Ruffo between 1721 and 1727. Great lover of painting, we remember his huge collection of paintings that later, between 1915 and 1919, was given by Prince Fabrizio Ruffo in part to the Museum of San Martino in Naples and in part to the National Museum of the Palazzo di Venezia. Painter and client were bound by relationships of trust and friendship, and both canvases contain the symbolic meaning of a request for pardon for two condemned advanced by Crespi to Cardinal Ruffo and then accepted by them.
The scene of forgiveness, is represented by the episode:
ABIGAIL THAT ASKS FORGIVENESS TO DAVIDE
Abigail is a biblical character and her story is told in the first book of Samuel. A "sensible and good-looking woman" was the wife of Nabal of Carmel, a rich owner of herds; king David, finding himself in trouble in the desert, sends his servants from Nabal to ask for provisions, reminding him of the protection previously offered by his people to his men. Nabal, however, rejects with arrogance and Davide, offended, decides to take revenge with the idea of killing all the males of the Nabal family. When Abigail was warned of the attack, secretly by her husband and with the help of the servants, loaded a large number of provisions on the asses and went to David, throwing herself at his feet and begging him to forgive the offense suffered and save his people; Davide, moved, renounced his purpose of revenge and thanked Abigail for preventing him from carrying out a massacre. Nabal died 10 days later and David married Abigail, from whom he had his second son, Kileab, also called Daniel.
The salvation is represented by the biblical episode of Moses saved by the waters: 
MOSE SAVED BY THE WATERS
The composition of the painting is pervaded with movement and theatricality, typical features of Baroque art, an artistic trend developed between the 16th and 17th centuries. It is characterized by a transformation of taste and style for which there is a degeneration of classical and Renaissance taste; in fact, it is characterized by its bizarre and extravagant effects, its disproportionate forms, the curved and very dynamic lines, the great ornamentation and above all, its strong play of light, with great symbolic meaning. Everything in Baroque art is aimed at arousing wonder and amazement. Returning to the painting, the whole scene is organized around a narrative nucleus, represented by the central figure of the pharaoh's daughter and her maidservants, busy around the small Moses in swaddling in the waters of the Nile. The figures enjoy their own light and stand out against a dark background whose whites return strength.
