This room, Altoviti Hall, actually takes its name from the frescoes on the ceiling, originally painted by Giorgio Vasari for the loggia of the Palazzo Altoviti. 
Palazzo Altoviti, the Roman residence of the florentine banker Bindo, was built in front of Castel Sant'Angelo, on the left bank of the Tiber river, in the economic district of Rome, where, at that time, there were the banks and residences of several important bankers, most of them coming from Florence, that worked in conjunction with the Roman Pope. 
The proof is that also now in that district several roads and streets are named “via dei Banchi Vecchi” or  “Via dei Banchi Nuovi”, “Via del Banco di Santo Spirito” and so on.
Bindo Altoviti moved to Rome in 1550, to be at the service of Pope Julius III, born Giovanni Maria Ciocchi del Monte, native of Tuscany as the Altoviti himself.
Bindo Altoviti was in charge to finance the building of countryside residence of the Pope, today known as Villa Giulia. Giorgio Vasari worked in the Villa too, and there he met Bindo.
Altoviti asked Vasari to paint one of the rooms of his Roman palace. The frescoes, painted in 1553, represent the myth of Ceres, goddess of fertility and prosperity.
In the middle of the ceiling she is sitting on a throne holding a cornucopia and ears of wheat, symbols of wealth, receiving gifts from priests and maids. Next to Ceres there is a snake, an animal that symbolizes the earth’s generation forces.
It is interesting to note that the yellow dressed priest is Bindo Altoviti himself, while the priest next to him is Michelangelo Buonarroti.
Beside the central oval there are two allegories connected to the Altoviti family: Florence, where they come from, that is represented by the girl crowning the Arno river, characterized by the lily and the lion, two symbols of Florence and Rome, where they became rich, embodied by the girl with an helmet that crowns the Tiber river, characterized by the she-wolf with Romolo e Remo, symbols of Rome.
All around the ceiling there are twelve paintings that represents the personifications of the months. The year starts in March and ends in February. The reason is that, at that time, March was the month when the wars, stopped during the winter, started again. Moreover March was the month when the Annunciation to the Blessed Virgin Mary happened.
March is symbolized by the god Mars, while April is symbolized by the goddess Venus. The two pictures actually represents Gianbattista Altoviti, Bindo’s son, and his future wife Clarice Ridolfi respectively: the choice to represents in the middle of the ceiling the myth of Ceres, the goddess of fertility and prosperity, was to celebrate Giambattista and Clarice’s future wedding.
The other ten months follow another criterion and are represented through arts and crafts. For instance September is a man who is gathering grapes, February is an old man who warms himself by the fire and so on. Among them it is interesting to note that July is a man who reaps wheat, and the man is Giorgio Vasari himself, that is gathering the results of his work.
In 1876 the so-called “Tiber Law” was enacted by the Italian Government. According to it several building built on the banks of the Tiber had to be demolished in order to create the Tiber’s embarkments, with the aim of avoiding the overflows of the river whose water too frequently flood the street of Rome. Among the building to be destroyed there was also the Palazzo Altoviti.
It was decided to preserve the Vasari’s frescoes, detaching them from the ceiling, through the “strappo” technique by the painter and restorer Pietro Cecconi Principi.
The frescoes were first stored in Palazzo Corsini, then in Castel Sant’Angelo for a temoporary exhibition. In 1917 they were brought to Palazzo Venezia, where Federico Hemanin, the first museum director, decided to set the frescoes up in this hall.
The frescoes were mounted on a frame made of wood and iron. So now the frescoes are a sort of countertop and this can be easily understood looking at the brown square painting close to Arno river. A couple of hinges are clearly visible on a side of the square, that make understand that the square itself is a manhole that can be opened to inspect the frame that hold the frescoes and to inspect the overlying original Pisana Hall vault.
In 2003 the frescos were restaured for the first time.