The bust of the pope Paolo II Barbo has been realized in marble by the sculptor Mino da Fiesole. Mino Da Fiesole was an Italian sculptor born in Tuscany in 1429. He devoted his life to the sistematic study of marble portraiture, a genre taken from the ancient. He always worked for prestigious families, for example de' Medici (see the bust of Piero de' Medici – 1453). He also realized many funeral monuments such as Della Rovere's (Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo), or Pope Paolo the Second’s ones (Basilica of San Pietro). His work is a synthesis between the Florentine tradition and the classicism. 
The bust is leaned above an oval base with the latin name of the pope: “PAULUS VENETUS PP II”. The pope is the “landlord” of Palazzo Venezia: he was born in Venice in 1417 and in 1455 he became titular cardinal of the church of San Marco in Rome, then he was elected pope in 1464. During his cardinalate, he realized some important renovations in order to give the palace a sumptuous and imposing appearance and at the end it became a papal residence. The pope has a wide face with some wrinkles around his mouth, his eyes and also on his forehead. He has a volitive expression and an authoritarian attitude as his eyes and his lifted chin show. The importance of his role as a pope is underlined by his sumptous dresses, by the great fibula encrusted with diamonds and finally by the very precious headgear adorned by 3 crowns that show us his passion for jewels, that he collected. Paolo II brought the Carnival in the centre of the city and we can say that he was the inventor of the modern Carnival as he wanted the festivity to take place in the very historical centre. The most important moment was the Berber horses race: the horses started galloping from Piazza del Popolo in the crowd to arrive to Piazza Venezia. This race sometimes had also very serious consequences. The name of the street that links Piazza del Popolo to Piazza Venezia – Via del Corso - took its name from this race.
