“Two friends” is one of the most important painting in the Museum and his author – Giorgione - is a famous painter of the Venetian school during the high Renaissance between the end of ‘400 and the beginning of ‘500. Giorgione has given a turning point to Venetian painting, thanks to his interest in human feelings. 
For a long time this painting has been the focus of a discussion about its authorship, later accepted by critics. The painting is one of the most original inventions of the time and it plays an important role in Italian portraiture.
In the painting there are two figures with different attitudes.
The first boy is raffigurated with his arm supporting his head. He’s about 20, he’s young and wears a falded shirt, a heavier dark dress with wide sleeves on it and a round and flat cap. His look appears malinconic and sad and represents his way of living love; his melanconia is symbolized by a fruit called “melangolo” that is similar to an orange but with a sweet flavor at first that turns into a sour and bitter flavor. This fruit is held by the boy and its bitter taste represents the two sides of love: on one side the beauty and the sweetness while on the other side the suffering and the bitterness. Behind him there’s another boy with a different attitude: he has a straighter, penetrating look that seems to criticize the way of living love of the other boy and almost to create a visual contact with the observer.
This work was painted after a conversation between Giorgione and Pietro Bembo in the Venetian school, about love in all of its form. The different ways of living love can be connected to a literary work of Pietro Bembo: the “Asolani dialogues” which describes the three levels of love: the happy, the sad and the spiritual one.  Bembo wrote this work while he was at the court of Caterina Cornaro, the overthrown queen of Cyprus, who moving to Veneto surrounded herself with artists. Probably Giorgione ricreated a pictural interpretation of the threee literary love levels of Bembo.
